docs: how to manage metrics (#1692)
canonical/operator: docs/howto/manage-metrics.md

> # How to Manage Metrics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# How to manage metrics
```

- {ref}`manage-configurations`
- {ref}`manage-secrets`

## Deploy the charm and grant access to the user secret

Create a config file with the secret ID and pass it to the `metrics-secret-id` config option. For example, the file `mycfg.yaml` might look like:

```yaml
metrics-charm:
  metrics-secret-id: <secret-id-here>
```

Then, when deploying the charm, use the `--config` option to pass in the YAML config file:

```bash
juju deploy <charm-name> --config mycfg.yaml
```

After deploying the charm, grant access to the user secret:

```bash
juju grant-secret metrics-user-password <charm-name>
```

For more information, refer to:

- {external+juju:ref}`Juju | deploy <command-juju-deploy>`
- {external+juju:ref}`Juju | config <command-juju-config>`
- {external+juju:ref}`juju grant-secret <command-juju-grant-secret>`

## Access the metrics endpoint

### Within the same Kubernetes cluster

Deploying the charm causes Juju to automatically create a Kubernetes service named `<charm-name>-endpoints` within the Kubernetes cluster. Use this service to connect to Pebble within each workload container. Pebble's HTTP port for the first workload container is `38813`.

> For example, if you deploy a charm named `my-charm` in the `test` namespace, access the metrics endpoint at `my-charm-endpoints.test.svc.cluster.local:38813/v1/metrics`. You'll need to use HTTP basic authentication with the username and password that you specified in the `juju add-secret` command.

Author: I'll leave out the protocol, a few reasons: 
- protocol isn't part of DNS
- consistent with the K8s doc
- we might support TLS in the future

See more:

- [Service discovery within a Kubernetes cluster](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/dns-pod-service/)

> ### Through an Ingress

Author: An Ingress resource is the most accurate, but since we don't say "accessing a Pod resource", I guess it's OK to say just an "Ingress".

To access the metrics endpoint from outside the Kubernetes cluster, use an Ingress.

> Use the service `<charm-name>` service in the Ingress (which is also automatically created) instead of the `<charm-name>-endpoints` service, as the latter is a [headless service](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#headless-services) and doesn't have a ClusterIP.

Reviewer: Suggestion for consistency with the Kubernetes section:

```suggestion
Use the service `<charm-name>` service in the Ingress (which is also created by Juju) instead of the `<charm-name>-endpoints` service, as the latter is a [headless service](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#headless-services) and doesn't have a ClusterIP.
```

> - To expose the Pebble HTTP port, use [`ops.Unit.set_ports`](ops.Unit.set_ports) in your charm code:

Reviewer: I think it's fine to drop the full path:

```suggestion
- To expose the Pebble HTTP port, use [`set_ports`](ops.Unit.set_ports) in your charm code:
```

```python
  self.unit.set_ports(38813)
```

> - To create an Ingress, use the following example (assuming the charm and service name is `my-charm`):

Reviewer: I wasn't sure where I would apply this example (but I'm not very experienced with K8s). Would this be appropriate?

```suggestion
- To create an Ingress, use the following cluster configuration (assuming the charm and service name is `my-charm`):
```

Author: I'll use "Ingress resource example" to be consistent with the [K8s doc](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress/#the-ingress-resource).

class MyCharm(ops.CharmBase):
  ...

  def _on_config_changed(self, event: ops.ConfigChangedEvent) -> None:
    # The user must have:
    # - Created a secret with keys 'username' and 'password'
    # - Stored the secret ID in the 'metrics-secret-id' configuration option
    secret_id = str(self.config["metrics-secret-id"])
    secret = self.model.get_secret(id=secret_id)
    content = secret.get_content()
    username, password = content["username"], content["password"]
    self._replace_identities(username, password)

  def _on_secret_changed(self, event: ops.SecretChangedEvent) -> None:
    if event.secret.id == self.config['metrics-secret-id']:
      content = event.secret.peek_content()
      username, password = content["username"], content["password"]
      self._replace_identities(username, password)

  def _replace_identities(self, username: str, password: str) -> None:
    identities = {
      username: ops.pebble.Identity(
        access="metrics", basic=ops.pebble.BasicIdentity(password=sha512_crypt.hash(password))
      ),
    }
    self.container.pebble.replace_identities(identities)
    logger.debug("New metrics username: %s", username)

  ...
```

> The password of the Pebble identity is stored as a hash, which we generate using `sha512_crypt.hash()` from `passlib.hash`.

Reviewer 2: Could we link to docs for this function, or at least the library?

When Pebble receives a request to access the metrics endpoint, Pebble will verify that the basic authentication credentials in the request match the identity's username and password.

> See more:
> - {ref}`make-your-charm-configurable`
> - {ref}`manage-configurations`
> - {ref}`manage-secrets`

## Deploy the charm and grant access to the user secret

We'll use a configuration file to set `metrics-secret-id` to the secret ID.

First, create a configuration file named `metrics-config.yaml`:

```yaml
metrics-charm:
  metrics-secret-id: <secret-id-here>
```

Then, when deploying the charm, use the `--config` option to pass the configuration file:

```bash
juju deploy <charm-name> --config metrics-config.yaml
```

After deploying the charm, grant access to the user secret:

```bash
juju grant-secret metrics-user-password <charm-name>
```

> See more:
> - {external+juju:ref}`Juju | config <command-juju-config>`
> - {external+juju:ref}`Juju | deploy <command-juju-deploy>`

> > - {external+juju:ref}`Juju | grant-secret <command-juju-grant-secret>`

Reviewer 2: I think config and deploy are such basic commands they don't need to be linked, and maybe we can link grant-secret in the text above: `... [grant access](...) to the user secret`.

## Access the metrics endpoint

### Within the same Kubernetes cluster

Deploying the charm causes Juju to create a Kubernetes service named `<charm-name>-endpoints` within the Kubernetes cluster. Use this service to connect to Pebble within each workload container. Pebble's HTTP port for the first workload container is `38813`.

For example, if you deploy a charm named `my-charm` in the `test` namespace, access the metrics endpoint at:

```text
my-charm-endpoints.test.svc.cluster.local:38813/v1/metrics
```

You'll need to use HTTP basic authentication with the username and password that you specified in the `juju add-secret` command.

> See more: [Service discovery within a Kubernetes cluster](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/dns-pod-service/)

### Through an Ingress

> To access the metrics endpoint from outside the Kubernetes cluster, use an Ingress.

Reviewer 2: It might help with David's point above if we link the word Ingress. Can we link it to https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress/?

    # The user must have:
    # - Created a secret with keys 'username' and 'password'
    # - Stored the secret ID in the 'metrics-secret-id' configuration option
    if not self.config.get('metrics-secret-id'):
      return
    secret_id = str(self.config["metrics-secret-id"])
    secret = self.model.get_secret(id=secret_id)
    content = secret.get_content()

>     self._replace_identities(content["username"], content["password"])

Reviewer 2: Thanks. Let's make the same change below for consistency.
